Methodology and Results
I ran a logistic model in R using the Census data provided for the exercise. The data was flattened into a single table, then edited to conform to the R environment (i.e. missing values were translated).  Following this, I explored the data through a series of histograms, barplots, and cross-tabulation tables. Moving into the model building phase, automatic variable selection algorithms suggested a full model with all variables. However, two variables, Race and Country, were not significant at the 0.001 level. Furthermore, since the AIC statistic and the AUC were only negligibly lower when comparing a full model to a model without these two variables, the more parsimonious model with less variables was selected. There were also a few variables that had to me manipulated. To account for quasi-separation, I had to merge two levels within the variable education_num. Additionally, to satisfy the assumption of linearity for the continuous variables, the variables age, capital_gain, and capital_loss were binned and transformed into categorical variables. Once we ran the model, and after checking for outliers or influential observations, a cut-off rule based on Youden’s J statistic was used (given that we don’t have costs associated with false positives or false negatives) which gives equal weighting to false positives and false negatives. The final model built is:
Over_50k = age(bin) + education_num(edited) + marital_status + occupation + relationship + sex + workclass + capital_gain(bin) + capital_loss(bin) + hours_week
The model resulted in an AIC statistic of 17935 and a misclassification rate of 18%. When used with data in the test partition, the model resulted in a misclassification rate of 19%, with sensitivity of 83% and specificity of 81%, results consistent with its performance within the training and validation partitions. Of particular interest were the fact that on holding all else constant, and on average, males are 2.24 times more likely than females to earn over 50k, as well as that each extra hour of work during the week increases the odds by 1.02 times.
